My name is Dominic Mankit Lamb. You can get the
spelling later, right? And I hold a number of
positions. Most of them are in the Woodlands. I'm
the founding director of the Center for
Biotechnology at Baylor College of Medicine,
which is located in the Woodlands. It's founded in
1985 and
And the building was completed in 1987 on an 11 acre
of land donated to Baylor by George Mitchell. I'm
also professor of biotechnology, cell biology,
and ophthalmology at Baylor College of Medicine.
Additionally, in 1984, I
co-founded Houston Biotechnology
Incorporated,
which is a company based on an invention that a
colleague of mine, Dr. Jared Emery, and I
discovered when we were professors at Baylor. And
on the basis of that discovery, a company was
founded, started by Baylor in Houston, and in 1986
we moved up to the Woodlands. And what was the
nature of the discovery? Could you describe it a
bit? Yeah, I will talk about each operation
because otherwise it's very confusing. And then
in 1989,
I also founded another company based on Baylor's,
another technology that I developed while at
Baylor College of Medicine, and that company is
called GES Pharmaceutical, for genetic engineer
systems, Pharmaceuticals Inc. That company is
also located in the Woodlands, and I'm a director
of that company.
A little bit of the background, I was born in
mainland China, but moved to- my whole family
emigrated to Hong Kong when I was four months old,
and I grew up in Hong Kong. At sixteen I went to
college in Canada, first in mathematics, and then
I did a master's
theoretical physics before I became interested
in medicine and
especially in pharma research. So I did my
doctorate at University of Toronto and then upon
finishing that I went to Harvard Medical School
where I worked with two professors there, Dr. and
Dr. David Hubel, who later on in 1981 received the
Nobel Prize in medicine. I stayed on at Harvard
until 1977 as an assistant professor at Harvard.
In 1977, I moved to Baylor College of Medicine to
head a program in their ophthalmology
department. It was in that environment that I
discovered with my colleagues in 1984 a treatment
for secondary cataract, or more accurately, a
preventive for secondary cataract. And this is
based on a new technology called hybridoma
technology, which is the production of
monoclonal antibodies. in vitro. Using that
technology, we found that we can produce
antibodies when they are coupled to certain types
of toxins would destroy the cells that cause
secondary cataract. Now very briefly, what is
secondary cataract? Secondary, we all know what
primary cataract is. Primary cataract is the is
when the length of the eye becomes clouded because
the cells started to die then that obstructs the
passage of light between the outside world and the
back of the eye which is the retina when that
happened then normally the patient would go to the
ophthalmologist which who, in a half an hour
operation, would remove the lens and sometimes
put in the artificial lens. Yeah, my mother had
that done. She has 20-20 vision now. It's
incredible. It's the most popular surgical
procedure in the United States, accounting for
about 1.2 million cases a year in the United States
alone. And it works extremely well most of the
time. There's only one major complication with
the procedure, which is called extracapsular
extraction.
And that complication has to do that the surgeon
rarely can remove all the cells that cause
cataract. So there are always a few cells left.
that then try to form another lens and they don't
form it successfully so again they instead of
forming a transparent lens they form what is like a
frosted lens so that light again is obstructed
from or images are obstructed at that place and in
1984 i thought that if one could have a medicine
such as a very specific antibody which at the end of
the surgery could be injected into the eye to
destroy all the cells that could not be, the
minuscule amount of cells that could not be
destroyed by, could not be removed by surgery.
That would clear the problem and this was what we
did. This product is now going into clinical
trials, and
we expect it to have a market in the United States
alone of hundreds of millions of dollars, because
it will be used in about a million patients a year,
and if one charges a couple hundred dollars,
that's already 200 million dollars. How long is
the processing period? What? How long will the
test period be before you can release it? Oh,
probably another few years before we finish the
testing, clinical testing. This is a brochure
about Houston Biotechnology, which is outdated.
It's two years old, but it gives you some idea of
what has happened and how we raise money and so on.
I'm also... Now, in 1985, when we were finding,
trying to find a permanent place to locate Houston
Biotechnology,
we were asked to look at the Woodlands by Mr. Mike
Richmond and Dr. Gottlieb, David Gottlieb. And we
decided that, especially because of the vision of
Mr. Mitchell and also the natural beauty of the
woodlands as a living, as a community in which to
live, that this would be a desirable place to move.
There's only one hitch that's a problem is that at
that time there was not even research forest road.
There was no high tech research or industry here at
all. And we felt that For high tech industry, one
must have a significant amount of intellectual
interactions and activities here. And so Mr.
Mitchell, in particular, convinced Baylor
College of Medicine that as a community leader,
that maybe they would build a center for
biotechnology out in the woodlands around which
new biotechnology companies can flourish. can be
established and flourish. Did you know this was
happening before you made the decision to move?
What was happening? Oh yeah, both moved at the same
time. The decision was made at the same time, that
if Baylor would do that, I would move up here and
build the first company, biotech company. And
that was all agreed upon in 1985. after which we
raised $26 million for Houston Biotechnology.
Did Mitchell's organization help you in that? In
raising the money? In raising capital? No, not as
much in raising $26 million. They put in some money
in the earlier round. as venture capital money.
But the major amount of money was raised by Sherson
Lehman Hutton in a public offering of R&D
partnership.
So
while I remain to this day as the chairman of
Houston Biotechnology, I was also asked to be the
founding director of the Center for
Biotechnology. put up all the money for the
building, and I was responsible for hiring the
people into the center, which now has about maybe
80 or so full-time members now in the three years
that we are here. That's a lot of development. And
now one reason that Baylor agreed to do this was
that, as you remember, when the energy
prices took a dive in 1983 or so, Houston suddenly
woke up to the fact that you could not live on a
single industry, namely the energy industry,
that you had to diversify. So the city attempted to
than to see what are the industries that Houston
can diversify into. One area is obviously in space
because of the NASA, another area is in shipping
because of the port, and then another area is in
petrochemical again because of energy related.
But a very important area that suddenly became
commercially very attractive is the
biopharmaceutical area, because the Texas
Medical Center in Houston is the largest medical
center in the world, in United States anyway,
maybe in the world, it's hard to know. However,
that has always flourished as almost a
pharentropic activity. When people make a lot of
money, like Collins and Jones, they donate the
money, but nobody has ever tried to commercialize
the research and medical products that come out of
that. So Houston Biotechnology was, in a way, the
first one that formalized the beginning of this
biopharmaceutical
commercialization effort, spearheaded by the
medical center. decided that the medical center
area is really too congested to sustain the
long-term industry. And therefore, the
Woodlands, because of Mr. Mitchell and because
his location, was chosen by us to be the place where
hopefully the biopharmaceutical industry in
Houston would flourish. What have been your
relations to the Houston Medical Center itself?
Well, I'm still a full professor with Baylor
College of Medicine. And I still go down to
committee meetings and so on. I'm still a chairman
of the department. But it's just that it's up here.
So the relationship, though, is basically still
cordial and very close, and you would expect it to
be... Oh, the relationship is very good, and in
fact, Baylor is responsible for all the operating
expenses up here. It's a full-fledged center
owned by Baylor. No, this particular building is
Houston Biotechnology. This is the commercial
side. At 30,000 square feet, this is for the
commercialization of biotechnology. of forming
products. On the other side is better culture
medicine. Yeah, they're two separate,
physically and financially and
administratively distinct. So this is happening
with the blessing of the Houston Medical Center
and the downtown community, the Texas Medical
Center. And with Baylor College of Medicine.
Yeah. Yeah, explicitly. Yes, that's right. And
subsequent to us, as you know, University of Texas
has built a cryobiology center here. Yeah, we saw
that. And Life Cell is here, another company.
started by University of Texas. F.D. Anderson has
founded a company called Argus that has moved up
here now. Okay, and the incentive for those moves
has come primarily from what threw us through?
Through the woodlands or through yourself? Well,
it's probably both. You know, as you know, most
people don't like to take the lead. And, you know,
when we first came here, the road has to be built.
There was no road. The forest, we have to... to
bring in sewage and telephone lines. This is the
first building in the research forest, right
here. And so, once I was willing with my colleagues
to build these first two buildings, it was much
easier to attract other companies and
institutions to come up. Now are these your
buildings, may I ask, or are they the Woodlands?
Well, this building is owned by the Woodlands, but
we lease. That building is owned by Baylor.
Did Mr. Mitchell donate the land for that
building? Yes, for Baylor's. And they own this
one? They own this one,
then we lease. Does your company now have any
direct involvement or relationships to the other
medical companies and industries that are
developing around you? Yes. For example, GES
Pharmaceutical, which I founded last year. Now,
Houston Biotechnology exclusively, yes, is
specifically developing drugs against eye
diseases. GES, which I founded last year, is to
develop drugs against other kinds of diseases,
such as neurological and cardiovascular
diseases. And then the Center for Biotechnology
has founded another company last year called
Triplex Pharmaceutical Corporation,
T-R-I-P-L-E-X. And that one is, you know, to use a
new kind of therapy to treat diseases. So we are We
are beginning to establish a large number of
companies. We also work with HAAC on different
projects. We collaborated on a project with using
laser to sculpture the cornea to correct
nearsightedness and farsightedness. So you
really see a sort of a complementary, symbiotic
medical community or something developing in
this area? Yes, biomedical community. That has a
great deal of promise. I think Baylor College of
Medicine is a national leader in this, a leader in
having academia and industry work side by side
each other, as you know. At A&M, there has been a lot
of difficulty trying to commercialize A&M's
products. But Baylor really has been a pioneer.
And universities from Stanford to Harvard come
here to see how this is done. Oh, which are private
institutions. Is that the distinction, the fact
that A&M, for example, is a state-supported
institution, whereas Baylor and Harvard? Yes,
that's partly true. But of course, Harvard,
Rockefeller, and Stanford are also private.
Right. And they also have problem with dealing
with between academia and industry. Yeah. Being
private, it makes it more flexible. But it's not
the only reason, difficulty with
commercialization of one's technologies.
Do you have any future directions now that you're
heading your company or your two companies? Yes,
we do. Our goal is to make the Baylor Center for
Biotechnology one of the leading biotech centers
in the country in research efforts. And in that
regard, we have already attracted a number of
first-rate scientists, so we are making the right
first step in that. The other companies that I
found, obviously, the priority is to have our
first product in the market. Now, GES
Pharmaceutical already has products for
screening drugs that are available. Some of those
will be licensed to US and Japanese companies and
European companies. But Houston Biotechnology,
is developing therapeutic agents, which take a
long time. And we have built what we believe is the
first FDA-approved GMP drug manufacturing
facilities in Houston for biological materials,
like proteins here in Houston. And that takes a
long time, and we have to go through the regulatory
affairs in getting drugs approved. But
hopefully, within the next five years, one can see
a number of important products that will emerge
from the woodlands. Not just from our company, but
other companies as well. This effort with HARC, is
it similar? The effort with HARC is mostly a
research effort. It has not been a conventional
effort. Again, HARC is a non-profit
organization.
But I think in the future we'll have some
commercial
efforts. What do you see as the dynamics of the
woodlands now in terms of its development? How is
this going to affect the development of the
woodlands and the Houston society generally? How
does this fit, say, the research part? Well, I
think the woodlands is already, it certainly lags
behind the research triangle part. Yeah, that's a
pattern we've heard mentioned a lot. In North
Carolina and also the Silicon Valley area. You see
something like that happening here, though?
Yeah, there's no question that we see something
like that around here, especially with respect to
biotechnology. Now, it's unlikely to happen in
microelectronics or telecommunication or
computers because we're too far behind to really
catch up on that. The last chance we had was
compact. It didn't move here. they didn't move
here but anyway um however in biotechnology where
the field is still very in this infant stage that i
think that the woodlands we are trying to build the
woodlands as the gulf coast equivalent to the east
coast and west coast establishment so we want to
establish this as the third coast for
biotechnology biopharmaceutical Your home is in
the woodlands? Yes, I live five minutes from here.
Do you find the environment itself an attractive
recruiting mechanism to bring people in? Well,
you know, other than having the privilege and
pleasure of working with Mrs. Mitchell, the major
reason why I moved here, and also many of my
colleagues, is because the woodlands is such a
great area to live in and to raise a family. I have
two children and they go to the very good public
schools. I think we're still an infant in terms of
the number of intellectual powers over here.
We're new. However, it's an environment where
people can live
among the woods and in a place that's safe, that's
still affordable, I would think that we're second
to none in the nation. And I think that's a major
strength that will help us continue to recruit the
top-notch people to December. Not only as not only
famous and established people, but as much as more
the brilliant young people. Because most of those
people can't afford to buy a house in California.
That's right. They want to have a family. So I think
this is a major strength. And as you know, they're
over, they're probably close to 200 PhD and MD
doctorate-level people in the woodlands. Which
is an unusual concentration in this part of the
country. And it's still, while it's small, it's a
very good nucleus on which to build our strength
for the future. So I'm very optimistic about the
future. I'm enthusiastic about building the
woodlands. Good. That's probably a good place to
stop. Okay. Thank you.